=head1 NAME

k5start - Obtain and optionally keep active a Kerberos v5 ticket.

=for stopwords
-bFhnPqstv keytab username kinit LDAP aklog HUP ALRM KRB5CCNAME AFS PAG
init AKLOG kstart krenew afslog Bense Allbery Navid Golpayegani
forwardable proxiable

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<k5start> [B<-bFhnPqstv>] [B<-c> I<child pid file>] [B<-f> I<keytab>]
    [B<-g> I<group>] [B<-H> I<minutes>] [B<-I> I<service instance>]
    [B<-i> I<client instance>] [B<-K> I<minutes>] [B<-k> I<ticket file>]
    [B<-l> I<time string>] [B<-m> I<mode>] [B<-o> I<owner>]
    [B<-p> I<pid file>] [B<-r> I<service realm>] [B<-S> I<service name>]
    [B<-u> I<client principal>] [I<username> [I<command> ...]]

B<k5start> B<-U> B<-f> I<keytab> [B<-bFhnPqstv>] [B<-c> I<child pid file>]
    [B<-g> I<group>] [B<-H> I<minutes>] [B<-I> I<service instance>]
    [B<-K> I<minutes>] [B<-k> I<ticket file>] [B<-l> I<time string>]
    [B<-m> I<mode>] [B<-o> I<owner>] [B<-p> I<pid file>]
    [B<-r> I<service realm>] [B<-S> I<service name>] [I<command> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<k5start> obtains and caches an initial Kerberos v5 ticket-granting
ticket for a principal.  B<k5start> can be used as an alternative to
B<kinit>, but it is primarily intended to be used by programs that want to
use a keytab to obtain Kerberos credentials, such as a web server that
needs to authenticate to another service such as an LDAP server.

Normally, the principal for which to give tickets should be specified as
the first argument.  I<username> may be either just a principal name
(including the optional instance) or a full principal and realm string.
The B<-u> and B<-i> options can be used as an alternative mechanism for
specifying the principal, but generally aren't as convenient.  If no
username is given as either the first argument or the argument to the
B<-u> option, the client principal defaults to the Unix username of the
user running B<k5start> in the default local realm.

Optionally, a command may be given on the command line of B<k5start>.  If
so, that command is run after Kerberos authentication (and running
B<aklog> if desired), with the appropriate environment variables set to
point it to the right ticket cache.  B<k5start> will then continue
running, waking up periodically to refresh credentials slightly before
they would expire, until the command completes.  (The frequency with which
it wakes up to refresh credentials can still be controlled with the B<-K>
option.)  To run in this mode, the principal must either be specified as a
regular command-line argument or via the B<-U> option; the B<-u> and B<-i>
options may not be used.  Also, a keytab must be specified with B<-f> to
run a specific command.

The command will not be run using the shell, so if you want to use shell
metacharacters in the command with their special meaning, give C<sh -c
I<command>> as the command to run and quote I<command>.

If the command contains command-line options (like C<-c>), put -- on the
command line before the beginning of the command to tell B<k5start> to not
parse those options as its own.

When running a command, B<k5start> propagates HUP, TERM, and QUIT signals
to the child process and does not exit when those signals are received.
(If the propagated signal causes the child process to exit, B<k5start>
will then exit.)  This allows B<k5start> to react properly when run under
a command supervision system such as runit(8) or svscan(8) that uses
signals to control supervised commands.

If a running B<k5start> receives an ALRM signal, it immediately refreshes
the ticket cache regardless of whether it is in danger of expiring.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-b>

After starting, detach from the controlling terminal and run in the
background.  This option only makes sense in combination with B<-K> or a
command that B<k5start> will be running and can only be used if a keytab
is specified with F<-f>.  B<k5start> will not background itself until
after it does the initial authentication, so that any initial errors will
be reported, but it will then redirect output to F</dev/null> and no
subsequent errors will be reported.

If this flag is given, B<k5start> will also change directories to C</>.
All paths (such as to a command to run or a PID file) should therefore be
given as absolute, not relative, paths.

If used in conjunction with a command to run, that command will also run
in the background and will also have its input and output redirected to
F</dev/null>.  It will have to report any errors via some other mechanism
for the errors to be seen.

Note that on Mac OS X, the default ticket cache type is per-session and
using the B<-b> flag will disassociate B<k5start> from the existing ticket
cache.  When using B<-b> in conjunction with B<-K> on Mac OS X, you
probably also want to use the B<-k> flag to specify a ticket cache file
and force the use of a file cache.

=item B<-c> I<child pid file>

Save the process ID (PID) of the child process into I<child pid file>.
I<child pid file> is created if it doesn't exist and overwritten if it
does exist.  This option is only allowed when a command was given on the
command line and is most useful in conjunction with B<-b> to allow
management of the running child process.

Note that, when used with B<-b>, the PID file is written out after
B<k4start> is backgrounded and changes its working directory to F</>, so
relative paths for the PID file will be relative to F</> (probably not
what you want).

=item B<-F>

Do not get forwardable tickets even if the local configuration says to get
forwardable tickets by default.  Without this flag, B<k5start> does
whatever the library default is.

=item B<-f> I<keytab>

Authenticate using the keytab I<keytab> rather than asking for a
password.  A key for the client principal must be present in I<keytab>.

=item B<-g> I<group>

After creating the ticket cache, change its group ownership to I<group>,
which may be either the name of a group or a numeric group ID.  Ticket
caches are created with C<0600> permissions by default, so this will have
no useful effect unless used with B<-m>.

If this option is used with a command or with the B<-K> option, there may
be a short window after each authentication during which the group
ownership of the cache will be the default group of the B<k5start>
process.

=item B<-H> I<minutes>

Check for a happy ticket, defined as one that has a remaining lifetime of
at least I<minutes> minutes.  If such a ticket is found, do not attempt
authentication.  Instead, just run the command (if one was specified) or
exit immediately with status 0 (if none was).  Otherwise, try to obtain a
new ticket and then run the command, if any.  Cannot be used with B<-K>.

If B<-H> is used with B<-t>, the external program will always be run even
if a ticket with a sufficient remaining lifetime was found.

=item B<-h>

Display a usage message and exit.

=item B<-I> I<service instance>

The instance portion of the service principal.  The default is the default
realm of the machine.  Note that unlike the client principal, a
non-default service principal must be specified with B<-I> and B<-S>; one
cannot provide the instance portion as part of the argument to B<-S>.

=item B<-i> I<client instance>

Specifies the instance portion of the principal.  This option doesn't make
sense except in combination with B<-u>.  Note that the instance can be
specified as part of I<username> through the normal convention of
appending a slash and then the instance, so one never has to use this
option.

=item B<-K> I<minutes>

Run in daemon mode to keep a ticket alive indefinitely.  The program
reawakens after I<minutes> minutes, checks if the ticket will expire
before or less than two minutes after the next wakeup, and gets a new
ticket if needed.  If this option is not given but a command was given on
the command line, an interval appropriate for the ticket lifetime will be
used.

=item B<-k> I<ticket file>

Use I<ticket file> as the ticket cache rather than the contents of the
environment variable KRB5CCNAME or the library default.  I<ticket file>
should be the path to a file, without any leading C<FILE:> string.  Using
this option forces a file-based ticket cache; if you wish to use a
different type of ticket cache, don't specify B<-k> and instead set
KRB5CCNAME to the designator of the cache you wish to use.

=item B<-l> I<time string>

Set the ticket lifetime.  I<time string> should be in a format recognized
by the Kerberos libraries for specifying times, such as C<10h> (ten hours)
or C<10m> (ten minutes).  Known units are C<s>, C<m>, C<h>, and C<d>.  For
more information, see kinit(1).

=item B<-m> I<mode>

After creating the ticket cache, change its file permissions to I<mode>,
which must be a file mode in octal (C<640> or C<444>, for example).

If this option is used with a command or with the B<-K> option, there may
be a short window after each authentication during which the file
permissions of the ticket cache will be C<600>.  Setting a I<mode> that
does not allow B<k5start> to read or write to the ticket cache will cause
B<k5start> to fail and exit when using the B<-K> option or running a
command.

=item B<-n>

Ignored, present for option compatibility with B<k4start>.

=item B<-o> I<owner>

After creating the ticket cache, change its ownership to I<owner>, which
may be either the name of a user or a numeric user ID.  If I<owner> is
the name of a user and B<-g> was not also given, also change the group
ownership of the ticket cache to the default group for that user.

If this option is used with a command or with the B<-K> option, there may
be a short window after each authentication during which the ownership of
the cache will be the user the B<k5start> process is running as.

=item B<-P>

Do not get proxiable tickets even if the local configuration says to get
proxiable tickets by default.  Without this flag, B<k5start> does whatever
the library default is.

=item B<-p> I<pid file>

Save the process ID (PID) of the running B<k5start> process into I<pid
file>.  I<pid file> is created if it doesn't exist and overwritten if it
does exist.  This option is most useful in conjunction with B<-b> to allow
management of the running B<k5start> daemon.

Note that, when used with B<-b> the PID file is written out after
B<k5start> is backgrounded and changes its working directory to F</>, so
relative paths for the PID file will be relative to F</> (probably not
what you want).

=item B<-q>

Quiet.  Suppresses the printing of the initial banner message saying what
Kerberos principal tickets are being obtained for, and also suppresses the
password prompt when the B<-s> option is given.

=item B<-r> I<service realm>

The realm for the service principal.  This defaults to the default local
realm.

=item B<-S> I<service name>

Specifies the principal for which B<k5start> is getting a service ticket.
The default value is C<krbtgt>, to obtain a ticket-granting ticket.  This
option (along with B<-I>) may be used if one only needs access to a single
service.  Note that unlike the client principal, a non-default service
principal must be specified with both B<-S> and B<-I>; one cannot provide
the instance portion as part of the argument to B<-S>.

=item B<-s>

Read the password from standard input.  This bypasses the normal password
prompt, which means echo isn't suppressed and input isn't forced to be
from the controlling terminal.  Most uses of this option are a security
risk.  You normally want to use a keytab and the B<-f> option instead.

=item B<-t>

Run an external program after getting a ticket.  The default use of this
is to run B<aklog> to get a token.  If the environment variable KINIT_PROG
is set, it overrides the compiled-in default.

If B<k5start> has been built with AFS setpag() support and a command was
given on the command line, B<k5start> will create a new PAG before
obtaining AFS tokens.  Otherwise, it will obtain tokens in the current
PAG.

=item B<-U>

Rather than requiring the principal to authenticate as be given on the
command line, read it from the keytab specified with B<-f>.  The principal
will be taken from the first entry in the keytab.  B<-f> must be specified
if this option is used.

When B<-U> is given, B<k5start> will not expect a principal name to be
given on the command line, and any arguments after the options will be
taken as a command to run.

=item B<-u> I<client principal>

This specifies the principal to obtain credentials as.  The entire
principal may be specified here, or alternatively just the first portion
may be specified with this flag and the instance specified with B<-i>.

Note that there's normally no reason to use this flag rather than simply
giving the principal on the command line as the first regular argument.

=item B<-v>

Be verbose.  This will print out a bit of additional information about
what is being attempted and what the results are.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUES

The program exits with status 0 if it successfully gets a ticket or has a
happy ticket (see B<-H>).  If B<k5start> runs aklog or some other program
B<k5start> returns the exit status of that program.

=head1 EXAMPLE

Use the F</etc/krb5.keytab> keytab to obtain a ticket granting ticket for
the principal host/example.com, putting the ticket cache in
F</tmp/service.tkt>.  The lifetime is 10 hours and the program wakes up
every 10 minutes to check if the ticket is about to expire.

    k5start -k /tmp/service.tkt -f /etc/krb5.keytab -K 10 -l 10h \
        host/example.com

Do the same, but using the default ticket cache and run the command
/usr/local/bin/auth-backup.  B<k5start> will continue running until the
command finishes.

    k5start -f /etc/krb5.keytab -K 10 -l 10h host/example.com \
        /usr/local/bin/auth-backup

Shows the permissions of the temporary cache file created by B<k5start>:

    k5start -f /etc/krb5.keytab host/example.com \
        -- sh -c 'ls -l $KRB5CCNAME'

Notice the C<--> before the command to keep B<k5start> from parsing the
C<-c> as its own option.

Do the same thing, but determine the principal from the keytab:

    k5start -f /etc/krb5.keytab -U -- sh -c 'ls -l $KRB5CCNAME'

Note that no principal is given before the command.

Starts B<k5start> as a daemon using the Debian B<start-stop-daemon>
management program.  This is the sort of line that one could put into a
Debian init script:

    start-stop-daemon --start --pidfile /var/run/k5start.pid \
        --exec /usr/local/bin/k5start -- -b -p /var/run/k5start.pid \
        -f /etc/krb5.keytab host/example.com

This uses F</var/run/k5start.pid> as the PID file and obtains
host/example.com tickets from the system keytab file.  B<k5start> would
then be stopped with:

    start-stop-daemon --stop --pidfile /var/run/k5start.pid
    rm -f /var/run/k5start.pid

This code could be added to an init script for Apache, for example, to
start a B<k5start> process alongside Apache to manage its Kerberos
credentials.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

If the environment variable AKLOG is set, its value will be used as the
program to run with B<-t> rather than the default complied into
B<k5start>.  If AKLOG is not set and KINIT_PROG is set, its value will be
used instead.  KINIT_PROG is honored for backward compatibility but its
use is not recommended due to its confusing name.

If no ticket file (with B<-k>) or command is specified on the command
line, B<k5start> will use the environment variable KRB5CCNAME to determine
the location of the the ticket granting ticket.  If either a command is
specified or the B<-k> option is used, KRB5CCNAME will be set to point to
the ticket file before running the B<aklog> program or any command given
on the command line.

=head1 FILES

The default ticket cache is determined by the underlying Kerberos
libraries.  The default path for aklog is determined at build time, and
will normally be whichever of B<aklog> or B<afslog> is found in the user's
path.

If a command is specified and B<-k> was not given, B<k5start> will create
a temporary ticket cache file of the form C</tmp/krb5cc_%d_%s> where %d is
the UID B<k5start> is running as and %s is a random string.

=head1 SEE ALSO

k4start(1), kinit(1), krenew(1)

The kstart web page at L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/kstart/>
will have the current version of B<k4start>, B<k5start>, and B<krenew>.

=head1 AUTHORS

B<k5start> was based on the k4start code written by Robert Morgan.  It was
ported to Kerberos v5 by Booker C. Bense.  Additional cleanup and current
maintenance are done by Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>.

Implementations of B<-b> and B<-p> and the example for a Debian init
script are based on code contributed by Navid Golpayegani.

=cut
