=head1 NAME

kstart - Obtain and optionally keep active a Kerberos v4 ticket

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<kstart> [B<-nqstv>]
[B<-f> I<srvtab>]
[B<-H> I<minutes>]
[B<-I> I<service instance>]
[B<-i> I<client instance>]
[B<-K> I<minutes>]
[B<-k> I<ticket file>]
[B<-l> I<minutes>]
[B<-r> I<service realm>]
[B<-S> I<service name>]
[B<-u> I<client principal>]
[I<username>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<kstart> obtains and caches an initial Kerberos v4 ticket-granting ticket
for a principal.  B<kstart> can be used as an alternative to kinit, but it
is primarily intended to be used by programs that want to use a srvtab to
obtain kerberos credentials, such as a web server that needs to
authenticate to another service such as an LDAP server or to AFS.

Normally, the principal for which to give tickets should be specified as
the first argument.  The B<-u> and B<-i> options can be used as an
alternative mechanism for specifying the principal, but generally aren't
as convenient.  If no username is given as either the first argument or
the argument to the B<-u> option, the client principal defaults to the
Unix username of the user running B<kstart> in the default local realm.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-f> I<srvtab>
	
Authenticate using the srvtab I<srvtab> rather than asking for a password.

=item B<-H> I<minutes>

Check for a happy ticket, one that has a remaining lifetime of at least
I<minutes> minutes.  If such a ticket is found, exit immediately with
status 0.  Otherwise, try to obtain a new ticket.

=item B<-I> I<service instance>

The instance portion of the service principal.  The default is the default
realm of the machine.  Note that unlike the client principal, a
non-default service principal must be specified with B<-I> and B<-S>; one
cannot provide the instance portion as part of the argument to B<-S>.

=item B<-i> I<client instance>

Specifies the instance portion of the principal.  This option doesn't make
sense except in combination with B<-u>.  Note that the instance can be
specified as part of I<username> through the normal convention of
appending a period and then the instance, so one never has to use this
option.

=item B<-K> I<minutes>
	
Run in daemon mode to keep a ticket alive indefinitely.  The program
reawakens after I<minutes> minutes, checks if the ticket will expire
before the next wakeup, and gets a new ticket if needed.

=item B<-k> I<ticket file>

Use I<ticket file> as the ticket cache rather than the contents of the
environment variable KRBTKFILE or the library default.

=item B<-l> I<minutes>

Set the ticket lifetime in minutes.  Note that if the ticket lifetime will
only be accurate to within five minutes, may be approximate if the ticket
lifetime is over ten hours, and cannot be more than about 21 hours unless
your Kerberos libraries support long ticket lifetimes.

=item B<-n>
	
Regardless of the setting of the environment variable KINIT_PROG, don't
run the program.

=item B<-q>
	
Quiet.  Suppresses the printing of the initial banner message saying what
Kerberos principal tickets are being obtained for, and also suppresses the
password prompt when the B<-s> option is given.

=item B<-r> I<service realm>

The realm for the service principal.  This defaults to the default local
realm.

=item B<-S> I<service name>

Specifies the principal for which B<kstart> is getting a service ticket.
The default value is C<krbtgt>, to obtain a ticket-granting ticket.  This
option (along with B<-I>) may be used if one only needs access to a single
service.  Note that unlike the client principal, a non-default service
principal must be specified with both B<-S> and B<-I>; one cannot provide
the instance portion as part of the argument to B<-S>.

=item B<-s>
	
Read the password from standard input.  This bypasses the normal password
prompt, which means echo isn't suppressed and input isn't forced to be
from the controlling terminal.  Most uses of this option are a security
risk.  You normally want to use a srvtab and the B<-f> option intead.

=item B<-t>
	
Run an external program after getting a TGT.  The default use of this is
to run B<aklog> to get a token.  If the environment variable KINIT_PROG is
set, the program is run regardless of the B<-t> flag (unless the B<-n>
flag is given).

=item B<-u> I<client principal>

This specifies the principal to obtain credentials as.  The entire
principal may be specified here, or alternatively just the first portion
may be specified with this flag and the instance specified with B<-i>.

Note that there's normally no reason to use this flag rather than simply
giving the principal on the command line as the first regular argument.

=item B<-v>
	
Be verbose.  This will print out a bit of additional information about
what is being attempted and what the results are.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUES

The program exits with status 0 if it successfully gets a ticket or has a
happy ticket (see B<-H>).  If B<kstart> runs aklog or some other program
B<kstart> returns the exit status of that program.

=head1 EXAMPLE

    kstart -k /tmp/service.tgt -f /etc/srvtab -K 10 -l 600 \
        rcmd.example

This uses the F</etc/srvtab> srvtab to obtain a ticket granting ticket for
the principal rcmd.example.  The lifetime is 600 minutes and the program
wakes up every 10 minutes to check if the ticket is about to expire.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

If the environment variable KINIT_PROG is set to a program (such as aklog)
then this program will automatically be executed after the ticket granting
ticket has been retrieved.

If no ticket file is specified on the command line, B<kstart> will use the
environment variable KRBTKTFILE to determine the location of the the
ticket granting ticket.

=head1 FILES

The default ticket cache is determined by the underlying kerberos
libraries.  The default path for aklog is determined at build time, and
will normally be whichever of B<aklog> or B<afslog> is found in the user's
path.

=head1 SEE ALSO

k5start(1), kinit(1)

The kstart web page at L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/kstart/>
will have the current version of B<kstart> and B<k5start>.

=head1 AUTHORS

B<kstart> was originally written by Robert Morgan.  Modifications and
additional features were added by Booker C. Bense.  Additional cleanup and
current maintenance is done by Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>.

=cut
